Across the past few decades, tourism in
Iceland has blown up. This year, that
phenomenon nearly took on a new meaning
with a volcanic eruption not far from
the famed Blue Lagoon. While far from a
novelty in the land of fire and ice, the
lava spewing fissures opening across the
landscape required an evacuation of the
area. The nation's tourism board was
quick to communicate that the incident
would have no implication to the capital
city or the international airport.
Though, difficulties in the tourism
economy were felt elsewhere in the
Northern Atlantic. As for years,
humpback whales just off the coast of
Ireland paid the bills for cork whale
watchers. But recently, the whales have
been harder and harder to spot, [music]
and thus business has been harder,
culminating in the company closing its
doors this year. Following food, the
whales have simply gone elsewhere,
making it another clear sign to
activists that the government isn't
doing nearly enough to protect its
waters from over fishing. An island
away, 2025 has seen much made about how
to treat the English Channel. British PM
Kier Starmer authored a letter to
France's president urging the nation to
help stop small boats leaving the French
coast headed to the United Kingdom from
taking off. The move was made to attempt
to slow the arrival of refugees and
asylum seekers into the UK as nearly
40,000 had already arrived in 2025
alone, pushing it into a major political
issue for the new Labor government. In
the notoriously environmentally
conscious Norway, 2025 saw Parliament
pass legislation that opens previously
protected rivers to potential damning
for the purposes of hydropower. That
move is controversial, as on the one
hand, it opens the door for increased
lowcarbon power production, but on the
other, critics are quick to point out
that damning and effectively destroying
wild rivers hardly resembles anything
green or renewable to begin with. If one
were to closely monitor the movement of
Sweden's Prime Minister, Olerson, they'd
simply need a bit of creativity and the
Strava app. Using the fitness mapping
app, an investigation by a Swedish
newspaper this year was able to figure
out the PM's preferred jogging [music]
routes and travel spots by looking at
the activities of his security guards.
It was an obvious security blunder and
another reminder as to how the most
innocent seeming social media sharing
can create major security breaches. In
both Finland and Denmark, policymakers
[music] moved to ban phones from the
classroom this year. In countries that
annually rank towards the top in public
education and overall happiness, perhaps
it's a surprise that it's taken this
long to ban phones from the classroom.
Citing not only education outcomes but
also self-esteem issues and the
increased digitization of daily life.
Both bands come at the national level.
Estonia however has opted to go the
opposite direction. In Estonian schools,
cell phones are being embraced as tools.
With the launch of [music] the AI Leap
2025 initiative, Estonia is leaning into
artificial intelligence within its
school systems as a tool to further
enhance outcomes. As a nation that has
quietly climbed up education rankings,
embracing AI in schools may seem bold to
the outside world, but a logical
progression within the country. Another
Baltic state has launched a rather
unique education program, but for a far
different purpose. In Latvia, the
country's intelligence and security
service published a guide for its
general populace to help better identify
[music] potential Russian spies. People
lingering near important sites, unckempt
tourists, and talkative, overly nosy
strangers were some stereotypes that the
service noted for Latapians to avoid and
report. Russian meddling also informed
public education efforts in Lithuania.
In a joint effort between the military
and the nation's education department,
the country has set a goal of educating
some 22,000 Lithuanians on drone skills,
from building them to flying them to
keep up with its eastern neighbor, which
quickly matched Ukraine in its drone
manufacturing and warfare capabilities.
The program is aiming to educate kids
beginning as young as 8 years old with
proper introductory classes and open
several drone training centers in the
coming years. Russia has been sending
shock waves across much of the rest of
the world for years now. And 2025 was no
different with an 8.8 magnitude
earthquake just off its eastern coast
triggering tidal wave alerts across the
Pacific in July. Even Russian nature has
been caused for international headaches.
For its part though, the earthquake also
may have played a role in triggering a
dramatic volcanic eruption in the
country's far east. Near no major
population centers, the crash in Indov
eruption is noteworthy in terms of
damage done, but for its rarity, as this
volcano hasn't erupted in some 600
years. In 2025, political leadership in
Barus released 52 political prisoners in
a move that would seem to counter trends
within the increasingly authoritarian
state. But the move was little more than
an effort to ease international
sanctions placed on the Lucenko regime.
Released to Lithuania, 52 only
represents [music] the smallest fraction
of the thousand plus political prisoners
that have been arrested within the
country over the last 5 years. A point
that was not lost on those fortunate
enough to be freed. A major potentially
divisive scandal has hit a country that
really doesn't need one in Ukraine. In
the middle of a war, Ukrainian President
Womir Zalinski has found his political
machine caught up in the middle of
corruption allegations led by the
country's anti-corruption bodies that
are claiming high-ranking officials have
been receiving illegal kickbacks from
the state-owned nuclear energy company.
It is news that has undercut government
credibility and is costing Zilinsky
important aids who are fleeing or
resigning as investigations continue.
Influenced by both Russia and the West,
Moldova made its current stance
wellknown in this year's parliamentary
elections. A sweeping victory for the
pro- [music] west pro-EU action and
solidarity party stands as a strong
rebuke to Russian efforts to sway the
former [music] Soviet state in their
direction. Russia has been accused of
widespread interference, going as far as
trying to buy off Orthodox priests with
payments and lavish vacations to garner
their support. As a Shankin area, Poland
in recent history has maintained an open
border between it and Germany. That was
until this year. Following right-wing
protests and claims over irregular
immigration into Poland from migrants
passing through Germany, Poland has
initiated temporary measures to increase
policing of its border crossings. A move
that's technically allowed [music]
within the EU agreements, but one that's
testing the Shenan area. It's normal in
the Crook Mountains of the Northwest
Czech Republic for hikers to be
wandering the local forests. It's not
normal for those hikers to stumble
across a treasure trove of 598 gold
coins, 10 gold bracelets, and various
century old valuables worth about
$650,000.
The discovery made by some hikers this
April was quickly handed over to the
local university where researchers are
working to understand the backstory of
how these goods ended up here about 80
to 100 years ago. On the other side of
the Morava River, Slovakia also grappled
with history when it [music] came to how
exactly to deal with Kanye West. slated
to perform at a summer hip-hop festival.
A grassroots movement to cancel the gig
gained momentum not long after Kanye
released a song titled After the Most
Notorious Nazi greeting in early May.
Thousands signed a petition and the
festival eventually cancelled the
performance. In Hungary, 2025 marked the
30th anniversary of Budapest's Pride
parade. In the face of PM Victor Orban's
ban on Pride, the event was the city's
largest as an estimated 100,000 marchers
made their way through its streets. The
event marked a celebration of the
nation's LGBTQ population and a defiant
stand against the country's right-wing
government. All of Europe turned its
attention to Romania this May as the
nation reported national election
results. Ultimately, it offered a sigh
of relief from European perspectives as
a centrist mayor beat out a former
soccer ultra and hard-right ultraist.
For the EU and NATO member Romania, it
was a nerve-free election cycle that saw
the ultimate result momentarily
contested. And earlier in the process,
another far-right candidate actually
removed from the ballot on account of
Russian interference in their support.
Russian espionage made the news in
Bulgaria, too. In London this March, six
Bulgarians went to trial over espionage
charges, claiming that these agents
working for Moscow were seeking to
discover the phone numbers of Ukrainian
soldiers training on specific air
defense technology. Among other things,
the dramatic trial over a 14-year
sentence has uncovered lies, deception,
and an unrealized love triangle between
the Bulgarian spies that is sure to
inspire at least [music] a limited
series. In Greece, life ground to a halt
this October when workers went on strike
from all sectors of the economy,
education to transportation. The strike
was in protest of another pro business
law set to pass at the national level,
which allowed for 13-hour workdays.
Countering European labor trends, the
13-hour workday did indeed pass. and
stands alongside legislation last year
that allowed for an elective 6-day work
week in the private sector that made
Greece one of the least attractive labor
markets within the EU. The labor market
[music] in North Macedonia is struggling
for the under25 demographic with many of
the country's young people leaving for
better economic conditions in
neighboring countries. It was this group
that was hit particularly hard when the
roof of an unlicensed nightclub caught
on fire and killed 59 people, the
majority of them young, while injuring
another 155, bringing close-knit tragedy
to the small European country of 2
million. The European Union produces an
annual report about potential new
members, and Albania and Montenegro sit
at top its [music] list for entry as
early as 2030. Albania's assession talks
should conclude by the end of 2027, as
the country is recognized for its
progress on rooting out corruption. The
existing 27 country block weighs in on
who can enter next and other hopefuls
Georgia and Serbia both took back steps
amid [music] concerns about crackdowns
on free speech. In Serbia specifically,
hostilities have increased towards
journalists and a backlash to their
reporting on anti-government protests
with some outside agencies putting press
freedom there at its lowest level in
more than two decades. The political
system in Bosnia and Herzgovenia is
complex, comprising one federal
government with two major separate
entities beneath it. the Federation of
Bosnia and the Serb Republic where about
onethird of the population is Serbian.
The system set up after the Dayton
Accords in the 90s following the Bosnian
War is tenuous because of the competing
parties and this year a separatist
leader and ally of the country's
recently ousted Serb Republic leader was
elected to replace the territo's top
position in a snap election. The
previous leader was removed after being
found guilty of disobeying peace
policies. Yet his replacement by a close
ally keeps separatism at the forefront
of the region in advance of another
general election set to take place in
2027. The tourist hotspot of Drovnik in
Croatia already has a trash problem as
the city of just 42,000 deals with more
than 4.5 million overnight stays by
visitors each year. Now it's getting
other countries as garbage as well. This
winter, thousands of pounds of plastic
drifted onto Drovnik's popular beaches.
Officials think it's presumably from
Albania because of the language on the
trash and the way that the ocean flows,
and they're planning to use satellite
monitoring in the future to divert some
of it before it comes ashore. Europe's
upcoming 2026 Eurovision competition was
already creating plenty of controversy
this year as at least four countries,
Ireland, Spain, Slovenia, and the
Netherlands have said they would boycott
it because the contest governing body
has allowed Israel to participate.
Several broadcasters had demanded its
exclusion due to its actions in the war
in Gaza. The small country inside of
Italy, San Marino, is not boycotting.
However, although they've sent a
contestant 14 times before, San Marino
has never won Eurovvision, but residents
are hopeful that DJ Gabby Pont might be
the golden ticket in 2026. The Golden
Passport program that allowed foreigners
to pay for citizenship in Malta was
deemed illegal by the top EU court. For
€750,000 and 12 months spent in Malta,
non-residents could pay cash to get the
affforementioned golden passport, named
so because it also gave them access to
live and work in all EU countries.
Critics say it opened the door for
nefarious actors and corruption into the
EU. Whereas Malta argued that the fund
it created, 1.4 billion, represented
critical investment for the small island
country. Another small European country
known for luxury added an event this
year that strengthens that association.
The first ever Grand Prix de la uteri
was held in Monaco which is a jewelry
competition that gave out eight awards
for exquisite designs and all the
expected players Tiffany and Co. Louis
Vuitton Bushon, Bulgaryi, Chanel,
Chopad, Dior were among the recipients.
Unofficial competition between countries
spurred the mayor of Rome in Italy to
declare that the Tyber River will be
swimmable in 5 years. The declaration
was prompted by Paris's recent cleanup
of the Sen for the 2024 Olympics. People
regularly swam in the Tyber River until
the 60s when it was found to be too
polluted for humans. It'll cost billions
of euros to clean it with most of the
pollution caused by microplastics.
[music] In a sign of increasing tension
across Europe, Austria is abandoning its
long-term goal of disarmament and
doubling its military budget over the
next 7 years by increasing it to more
than 2% of the country's GDP. Austria is
not part of NATO. But as the war between
Russia and Ukraine drags on and
neighboring countries increase their own
military spending, the country believes
it must respond to growing threats. In
the middle of the pack on at least one
social issue, Lichenstein became the
22nd country in Europe to legalize
samesex marriage, taking effect January
[music] 1st. The fourth smallest country
in Europe had previously allowed
registered partnerships, but the almost
unanimously supported law passed by
Parliament now grants all rights of
marriage to same-sex couples. Another
movement across Europe is the shift to a
digital wallet, and in Switzerland,
residents narrowly approved plans for
electronic ID cards. The digital ID is
linked to smartphones. Those wary of it
don't want to give over too much private
information and worry about security
breaches, as well as inequity for those
who don't have smartphones. Proponents
say it will streamline information for
users, and [music] in any case, physical
IDs are still available. The second
cousin to the throne of Luxembourg died
at the young age of 22 due to a rare
disease caused by mutation in his PG
gene. The illness was discovered when
Prince Frederick was 14 and he led the
remainder of his life raising awareness
and research funding for mitochondrial
diseases. Also addressing the growing
threat of Russia, Germany is trying to
replenish its military reserves. Though
it decided this year it will not go as
far as mandatory conscription. For now,
officials will stick with voluntary
conscription, in which all men will have
to register their readiness and medical
ability to serve. Women will also be
considered for voluntary service, and if
numbers do not reach the levels needed,
the government will consider mandatory
call-ups again. The US China war for the
global chip industry fought a battle in
the Netherlands this year, where
manufacturer Nexperia is based. The
United States put Chinese-owned wing
tech, which owns Nexperia, on a trade
blacklist, citing national security
concerns. And [music] echoing those
concerns, the Dutch government briefly
took over Nperia to keep the
semiconductor sector in motion. After
China responded by implementing export
controls that damaged European supply
chains, the Netherlands gave in without
any meaningful efforts to alleviate the
concerns, and Neria was given back to
[music] China. Laws to limit and
prohibit smoking and vaping are
spreading around the world, and Belgium
made history this year by becoming the
first EU country to ban disposable
vapes, taking effect on January 1st.
>> [music]
>> The country has ambitious goals of
entirely snuffing out new smokers to
zero by 2040. And this law was one step
towards making that happen. In France, a
heist, no, not that heist, left one
family business out at least $100,000
when more than 990 lbs of [music]
snails, popularly known as Esargo, were
stolen from their headquarters. The
French eat 37 million pounds of snail
annually, a figure that skyrockets
towards the holidays when the delicacy
is served. And officials believe the
thieves have been scoping out this
particular business for theft [music] in
advance of the most profitable season.
The Games of these small states of
Europe is a bianual sports competition
resembling the Olympics. And in 2025,
Andor hosted its 20th edition. Only
European countries with fewer than 1
million residents can participate, and
more than 1,000 athletes travel to the
tiny country for the summer games.
Portugal is anything but small anymore
with a foreignb born population that's
tripled since 2019 [music] thanks to
lack citizenship requirements and an
accessible residency by investment
program. But the golden days of golden
visas are slowing with their newest
citizenship requirement that most
applicants must be in the country for at
least 10 years instead of five, unless
they're from an EU or
Portuguese-speaking country, in which
case it's going up to just seven. Not
only does this affect those with
Portuguese dreams, but also those in the
country's real estate and investment
sectors that are propped up by the
passport program. Another set of
foreigners descended upon a hotel in
Granada, Spain for the Spanish World
Scrabble Championships. [music]
But the winner wasn't someone who even
speaks Spanish, shocking the 150 other
competitors from 20 countries. Nigel
Richards, a Malaysian-B born New
Zealander, took home the top prize
thanks to his ability to memorize
thousands of [music] words despite not
knowing their meaning. For more than 50
years, control over a territory called
Western Sahara, about the size of
Britain, bordering Morocco and Algeria,
has been disputed. But the United
Nations vote to accept a 2007 autonomy
proposal from Morocco, means the fight
could finally be drawing to a close.
When Spain, which controlled the area,
withdrew in the '60s, both Morocco and a
group called the Polario Front claimed
[music] it. The Security Council's
acceptance of the proposal means it
could move forward developing local
legislative, executive, and judicial
authority for Western Sahara while
ultimately remaining under Moroccan
sovereignty. A flotilla of civilian
boats delivering humanitarian aid to war
torn Gaza was hit with a bomb carried by
a drone off the coast of Tunisia. The
flotilla had made news for carrying
activist Greta Thunberg previously, but
she was not on it at the time. Tunisian
officials, however, denied
responsibility and said the fire on the
boat broke out itself. And off the coast
of Libya, more than a dozen NGO rescue
vessels there have suspended cooperation
with the country's coast guard. The
Libyan agency receives funding from the
EU in order to intercept migrant boats
headed for Europe. But the NOS's are
saying that the Coast Guard is not a
legitimate search and rescue
organization, but rather a quote violent
regime enabled by the EU, citing
violence during interceptions and
inhumane conditions at the camps
migrants are brought to. A1 billion
dollar museum claiming to be the world's
largest archaeological facility opened
outside of Cairo, Egypt after more than
two decades in the making. The Grand
Egyptian Museum covers 470,000
m or roughly 5 million square ft and
features more than 50,000 items. There's
an ongoing civil war in Sudan and on top
of that officials are waging another
battle against chalera. There have been
more than 100,000 cases and 2500 deaths
so far, and the difficulties in
successful intervention are exacerbated
by the lack of infrastructure and basic
supplies, all left decimated by the
ongoing violence. Health groups are
trying to contain its spread across
borders to try to prevent a wider
epidemic in an [music] already
struggling region. Prince Harry serves
on the board of African Parks, a
wildlife conservation group in Chad. The
country briefly cut ties with the
organization this year, citing concerns
over mismanagement. [music]
But the relationship was reinstated
shortly after the group gave new
assurances and was given oversight over
several of Chad's national parks. It's
the second set of allegations
surrounding African charities against
Harry in a year [music] and more widely
demonstrates the complexities and
uncertainties of having foreign
nonprofits operate critical resources
for [music] countries that are in need.
Three countries, all recently taken over
by military hutas, have dropped out of
the International Criminal Court. Bkina
Faso, Mali, and Niger, all located in
the Sahel region, said they would
monitor and enforce peace [music]
internally. Roughly 125 countries are
part of the ICC, and this recent trio of
withdrawals came [music] with criticisms
that the court unfairly targets African
countries, calling it quote, "an
instrument of neocolonialist
repression." This is backed up by the
data, as all but one of the court's 33
cases since its founding have involved
an African country. But its defenders
say that the ICC is simply holding human
rights violators accountable in a region
that unfortunately encounters [music] a
lot of them. The effects of a $248
million migration partnership between
the EU and Moritania have started to
take effect with mass deportations
occurring across the country. Reports of
raids and enforcement throughout
Moritanian towns were reported and
hundreds of smuggling rings were broken
up. Over recent decades, Moritania
became a major transit point for
undocumented immigration to the EU from
all of Africa thanks to its proximity to
Spain's Canary Islands. Cape Verde
became the second smallest country in
the world to qualify for the World Cup
after defeating Eswatini in an October
soccer game. With just 525,000 people,
only the less populated country of
Iceland has previously qualified. Other
firsttime qualifiers in the upcoming
2026 World Cup include Usbekiststan and
Jordan. For athletes from Sagal, a
travel ban prevented the women's
national basketball team from attending
a 10-day training camp in the United
States. Instead, the training camp was
moved to Sagal in advance of the women's
Afro basket, Africa's continental
championship, which Nigeria ended up
winning, though Seneagal had been
victorious several times in the past.
Former Gambian President Yaya Jame ruled
from 1994 to 2017 before being removed
during the Gambian Revolution. But this
year, controversial sales and concerns
over corruption brought young protesters
out in the streets of the Gambia again.
Some called it the largest youth protest
[music] in the country's history,
demonstrating a growing concern, even
with new leadership, about corruption in
power. Despite having no art galleries
and no art school, a group of five
visionary artists pulled together Guinea
Bisau's first art bian, a show featuring
50 artists from 17 countries. The show
ran for a month in the nation's capital,
Bisau, and in addition to printed art,
live musical performances were hosted as
part of the cultural celebration, which
even more remarkably was done entirely
without government funding. The world's
largest known deposit of ore at 2.8
billion tons, sits deep in the mountains
of Guinea, and after decades of planning
and investment, both locally and
internationally, the first shipment
mined from it was [music] sent to China.
The $20 billion Simandu iron ore project
is being touted as one that could change
the future of the West African country
and its economy. But part of that future
is the paycheck that Guinea must give to
China, which significantly invested in
the infrastructure it took to make the
mine operation possible. A social media
influencer and dual citizen of Canada
and Sierra Leone was arrested early in
the year for a video she posted in 2023,
laying out 25 minutes of criticism of
the president and the first lady. Hawa
Hunt was detained on live TV and has
been jailed ever since, held for two
counts of quote transmitting insulting
messages via computer system. A part of
strict cyber security laws instituted in
2021. Hunt is being held in Freetown and
reports about poor conditions have
gained some international attention,
including by Amnesty International,
which has called for her release. Amid
shifting populations, the Liberian
government has proposed adding 14
additional seats and the same number of
new electoral districts to its House of
Representatives in what they say is a
change that will better serve the
public. Though it must be approved by
the president, some are arguing that
Liberia doesn't have the funding for the
new districts. They're concurrently
reviewing a bill that would also
decrease sitting lawmakers' salaries. A
1,320 ft 421 meter tall building that
now ranks as [music] the tallest in
Africa is just one legacy that fourth
term President Allesandre Utara of
Kotivvoir will leave behind. The
83-year-old was sworn in this year after
winning nearly 90% of the vote in a
violent election that left 11 dead and
some 1600 arrested for [music]
protesting the elections, which they say
were unfair when Utara's two main
opponents were not allowed to run.
Kamanto Market in Ghana is one of the
world's largest secondhand markets with
over 30,000 shops. But a widespread fire
this year burnt more than 60% of it.
[music] The market receives more than 15
million pieces of clothing each week,
primarily from Western countries looking
to give used or never purchased clothing
a repurpose. More than 30,000 people are
employed there, and nearly a full year
on, they're still repairing and
rebuilding. Fourthterm president Far
Gasimbe is the leader of Togo, a role he
took over from his father in 2005, who
had been leader since 1967. This makes
them the longest running political
dynasty in Africa. And low turnout for
municipal elections held this year
demonstrate that citizens are
increasingly [music] losing faith in the
process. Gazingbeg transitioned the
government to a parliamentary system in
2024, which many saw as a power grab.
And this year's voter apathy, subsequent
protests, and government crackdown show
their residents are likely right. A
group of military soldiers attempted a
coup in Benon, attacking institutional
buildings in a plot that was quickly
thwarted by officials. The attempt came
in advance of a presidential election in
April and was a surprise to some experts
[music] who had seen Benon as more
stable than its neighbors, which have
cumulatively experienced nine military
takeovers [music] between 2020 and 2023.
One of those neighbors, Nigeria, flew in
fighter jets at the request of the Benon
government to save off the attempt. A
country that has gone without any
successful coup attempts but has kept
one person in power for seven terms is
Cameroon. At 92, Paul Beia was sworn in
as the oldest president in the world and
the second longest serving in Africa.
And again, residents have accused the
election process of being fraudulent and
corrupt. Beia did away with term limits
in 2008, but going forward, his age may
be the more limiting factor. [music]
Amid diminishing output from natural gas
fields, Chevron inked a deal with
Equatorial Guinea for [music] $690
billion to develop the Asang Gas
Project, an oil field located offshore.
The country's oil output peaked in 2010
and has dwindled since, but this new
injection of cash is expected to bring a
new injection of output, too. Eyes are
on the Central African Republic and its
late December election, where Fost
Archung Tudera will run for president
again, [music] set to a scene where
Russia has been wielding soft power
through its Wagner mercenary group. The
agency was enlisted in 2017 to maintain
security in the country in exchange for
access to mineral rights. But officials
are worried about Russia's increasing
role in politics and its propping up of
Tuadera's position. And the tension for
power in South Sudan, the world's
youngest country, made headlines when
its vice president was put on house
arrest and then later charged with
treason and murder. Vice President Reek
Mashar is head of the party in
opposition to the president, but had
been appointed by the president as part
of a 2018 peace deal ending the civil
war. Therefore, his 2025 arrest puts
continued peace in a tenuous spot. While
it stopped short of a renewed civil war,
violence did increase between the
feuding factions. In Eratraa, 13
individuals, including one former
Olympian, were released from prison
after being detained without trial for
18 long years in relation to an
attempted assassination of a
presidential adviser. Ranked toward the
bottom of many human rights indicators,
the release comes as a surprise, and the
very fact that all 13 survived that long
is a major feat. The prison which held
them is reportedly little more than 20
shipping containers. Djibouti announced
it was set to further its position as
one of the most well-connected countries
in the Horn of Africa with the extension
of the DARE 1 undersea cable. The cable
will run off the east coast of the
continent all the way to Madagascar and
South Africa providing lower latency
connections and offering improved
network resiliency. As one of the more
stable eastern African countries, the
move furthers Djibouti's position as the
region's undersea cable hub. In
Ethiopia, a massive and ambitious dam
project finally came to fruition with
Prime Minister Abi Ahmed's inauguration
of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam,
holding back the Blue Nile, much to the
frustration of downstream neighbors in
Egypt and Sudan, the project began in
2011 and cost about $5 billion. For a
country with absurdly high fuel prices
and an increasingly large fleet of
electric vehicles, the idea of
increasingly stable and cheap [music]
power is an exciting one. In the west of
the internationally recognized country
of Somalia is the internationally
unrecognized country of Somaliand. This
year, Somaliand made its stance on its
own sovereignty more clear and denying
foreign nationals with Somalia issued
visas entry into the country while also
reaffirming control over its airspace.
The move comes as Somaliand is working
[music] to court favor and recognition
from the US. Kenya produces much of the
world's tea. This year they've decided
to go about it a different way as the
government has told tea factories to
quit working with the rainforest
alliance. The green frog sicker folks
that seek to promote more sustainable
farming practices globally. Kenyan
farmers just aren't making living wages
and the Kenyan government alleges that
the high price to work with the alliance
is being paid by the growers and not the
consumers. 2025 served as a glimmer of
hope for Uganda's youth and democracy
advocates with an election result,
albeit a farway one. While democracy
hangs on by a thread in Uganda, a vision
of hope, who happens to be one of their
own, won an inspiring and improbable
victory in New York City of all places.
[music]
Newly elected Mayor Zoran Mandani spent
his first seven years in Uganda, and his
victory and message has Ugandans hopeful
that similar messaging can help at home.
For well over a hundred years, Belgium
has maintained a diplomatic presence
within Rwanda. But following Belgian
calls for EU sanctions over Rwanda's
alleged support of the violent M23 rebel
group in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda expelled Belgian diplomats
and cut off formal diplomatic relations
with its former colonizer, citing
Belgian attempts to quote [music]
sustain its neoc colonial delusions.
Also flexing its sovereignty in the face
of the EU this year was Gabon. Following
the nation's first legitimate election
after its 50-year long dictatorship,
Gabon announced that it would be
withdrawing from an agreement with the
EU that gave Europe access to the
[music] nation's coastal fisheries. It's
bad news for Europe's tuna producers,
but the arrangement was viewed as a
lopsided deal for Gabon that saw little
money come in while its fisheries were
plundered, meaning it's a positive step
forward for the fledgling democracy. The
island nation of Saotomy and Principe
also had its neighboring waters front of
mind in 2025 as it made the nation's
first public commitment to marine
protection. Across eight separate
protected coastal waters, the nation has
banned certain fishing practices and
severely limited others. The nation
relies on fish for food and small boat
fishing for work, but has never before
set limits or protected certain species,
leading to dropping numbers and lowered
biodiversity. In subsaharan Africa, more
than any other region in the world,
drugresistant infections are a deadly
problem. This year, the Republic of
Congo teamed up with the World Health
Organization to try to limit this
problem. They did so through simulation,
setting up a realistic scenario of a
drugresistant pathogen appearing in the
population that local health officials
with help from the World Health
Organization rushed to track, report,
and snuff out as fast as possible.
There's reason for both hope and
pessimism for an end of fighting between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
M23 rebels that had advanced across the
country's east over the past year. A US
brokered peace deal led to a momentary
reduction in violence. But as the months
passed by, both sides failed to
implement the steps they agreed to, and
a new offensive in early December
brought back full-scale fighting. While
both sides still seem loosely committed
to ending the fighting, they continued
to commit violent actions and largely
ignore the agreement. Fleeing this
violence, tens of thousands of refugees
have crossed into Burundi, a nation that
celebrated a medical first in 2025.
Validated by the World Health
Organization, Burundi eliminated traoma,
a bacterial eye infection which is
classified as a neglected tropical
disease. Such diseases have major
impacts in impoverished countries and
while treatable, they require a
well-coordinated response to root them
out. The elimination of its first
neglected tropical disease is a major
win for the country's public health
program. In Tanzania, the outlook for
democracy, free and fair elections, and
general political dissension went from
bad to worse. An election year, the
process began with barring or arresting
popular opposition candidates running
against the incumbent [music] president
Samya Salulu Hassan, and then escalated
to arresting outspoken opposition before
eventually devolving into outright
violence. Following a win with a
reported 97% of the vote, Tanzanian
police have reportedly killed 1,000
protesters in the problematic [music]
and improbable results wake. The early
signs of a comeback showed themselves in
[music] seells this year. With the
successful hatching of 13 of 18 giant
tortoise eggs, conservationists have new
hope that with new techniques and
intervention, the giant tortoise may be
able to stave off extinction. Home to
one of two giant tortoise species in the
world along with 400 other endemic
species, Sey Shells has become a hotbed
for innovative conservation techniques
[music] in recent years. Similarly rich
in biodiversity and endemic species is
Kamoras. Traditionally cut off from the
rest of the world, this volcanic
archipelago recently signed a deal to
change that. Welcoming in over $130
million from the World Bank, the Islamic
Development Bank, and a host of other
international boosters, the plan is to
begin modernizing the country's major
ports with up-to-date infrastructure.
The belief is that the island nation may
begin to flourish as a logistics hub for
Africa and Asia, as well as a tourist
attraction. In Maitius, the new story
that has dominated decades [music] of
debate has finally come to a close this
year. In May, the UK announced it'd be
handing sovereignty over the Chagos
[music] Islands to Maitius more than a
half century after it split the islands
away from the newly independent country.
In return, the UK still gets to maintain
its strategically crucial military
presence on Diego Garcia, as the two
countries have agreed on a 99-year
lease. At the news of water and power
cuts, the youth of one of the world's
poorest countries decided it had finally
had enough this year. Madagascar's Gen Z
protest started in earnest in late
September with demonstrations, but
quickly evolved into something much
bigger. With the support of an elite
military branch that decided to back
their movement, [music] by mid-occtober,
a full-scale coup was underway, sending
the former president fleeing the country
and installing a military colonel to the
office. At the size of Switzerland,
Mosmbique's Nyasa Wildlife Reserve is
one of Africa's most important [music]
sanctuaries for threatened species. But
this year, the reserve found itself
under threat after ISIS terrorist
attacks on a safari camp and a training
center. While the Mozambique army
quickly deployed, the attacks have the
potential to undercut decades of
conservation work. Without fences and so
large to begin with, the reserve counts
on the conservationists presence,
[music] but that's hard to do when towns
are now being evacuated. Zimbabwe rolled
out its first batch of a unique set of
reparation payments this year. $311
million of money is starting to [music]
get paid out to some 400 white farmers.
a subset of the 4,000 who were
dispossessed of their land by the
government in the early 2000s. It marks
just the beginning as the country agreed
to pay out $3.5 billion in compensation
in 2020. To make sure these payments
continue, the IMF and World Bank have
held back funding in the country until
it has paid off this [music] debt. In
2022, Malawi's Kassungu National Park
introduced 263 elephants to the
preserve. 3 years on, neighboring
villages are now suing [music] over it,
claiming that the elephants have killed
at least 10 people, injured others, and
have left all living in a state of fear.
Locals are asking for protective fencing
around 167 villages and compensation for
damages. And in Zambia, elephants there
killed an American and a New Zealander
who were on safari in Langua National
Park. Guides attempted to thwart the
charging elephants, but were unable to
deter them. Reports note that female
elephants [music] can be especially
dangerous when protecting their young.
In the form of an NGO report, 2025
presented a hurdle for Angola's
potentially transformative rail project.
[music] Backed by the US and the EU, the
revitalization of the Loito Atlantic
Railway is bound to have major economic
ramifications as it will connect
Angola's rich minds to [music] the
coast. But a report that 6,500 people
will be potentially displaced by the
project has thrown some cold water on
the excitement and led an EU
spokesperson to reaffirm they'll keep a
close eye on social and economic impact
before going forward with their support
of the [music] project. Namibia in 2025
observed its first genocide remembrance
day. [music] The date May 28th was
chosen for commemoration as it was May
28th, 1908 when Germany ordered the
closure of all Southwest African
concentration camps. Speaking on the
day, Namibia's president called for
patience and unity as the nation
continues to seek reparations for the
100,000 deaths at the hand of Germany's
genocide of the Ovah Herrera and Nama
people. [music] In Batswana, officials
cut the nation's projected economic
growth estimates for the year to almost
zero. By value, Batswana is the world's
largest diamond producer, and the less
than enthusiastic economic outputs is a
reflection as to just how much the
diamond economy has changed. With lab
grown diamonds beneficial for both
global laborers and global consumers,
it's unlikely this is just a blip for
the nation, which now needs to
diversify. Drought and wildfires have
rocked southern Africa in the last few
[music] years. And this year, the effort
to adapt to a rapidly changing
environment and address these worsening
problems was decided to be headquartered
in Eswatini. Isatini's center of
excellence on drought resilience will
produce research work with regional
stakeholders and act as [music] a center
for collaborating NOS's international
bodies and neighboring nations on the
region's water crisis. The Lutu
Highlands Water Project that aims to
supply water to South Africa's
Johannesburg is making progress towards
its 2029 completion date. But not all
are happy about it. In Lutu, small towns
near the project are citing lowquality
water and a general lack of transparency
in forced relocations and subsequent
compensation. They're taking the issue
up with the African Development Bank,
which is helping fund this project,
[music] but seemed to fail in making it
fair and transparent. While importing
water, South Africa has been exporting
[music] troops. With no international
agreement between Russia and South
Africa for the latter to provide troops
in Ukraine, South African news this year
broke a story of three of [music] their
own trapped fighting in Ukraine. How
exactly they and 14 others ended up in
this situation is being worked out, but
the soldiers claimed that they were
tricked by a parliament member and
daughter of former president due to Zel
Zuma Zambula. Admitting no guilt, but
resigning from the position, the
politician has supported Russia's cause
from afar.
And that's it. One piece of news from
every country in the world. [music] The
idea of this was to help you broaden
your knowledge base so you know at least
a little bit about what's going on
everywhere in [music] the world. It's
certainly useful to have a broad
knowledge base, and I'm guessing you
recognize that if you got all the way to
country 193. If you want to keep that
learning going, I'd recommend our
sponsor, Brilliant. As someone who did
not excel at math in school, I used to
feel it was a missing area in my broad
knowledge base, and was a harder thing
to learn independently than other
subjects like history or geography. That
is until I tried Brilliant. They offer
learning that's personalized to you.
meticulously crafted courses with
interactive problems solving exercises
that help you learn fundamental concepts
of complex [music] subjects. I love how
you can start from basically any level
and keep progressively leveling up all
the way until you understand mindbending
subjects like number theory and the
concept of infinity. They also offer
learning tracks for other STEM subjects
like data analysis, science, and logical
reasoning. And with a mobile app,
Brilliant is a great way to fit learning
into your day. You can make meaningful
progress towards lofty learning goals
just in your time on the bus or waiting
for your next meeting. Brilliant has
been one of Wendover's longest running
sponsors thanks to how many Wendover
viewers find it worthwhile, which
personally I don't find too surprising.
Wendover viewers seem to like learning
in their free time, and so do Brilliant
users. To learn for free on Brilliant
for 30 days, go to
brilliant.org/wendover,
scan the QR code on screen, or click the
link in the description. Brilliant's
also given our viewers 20% off an annual
premium subscription, which gives you
unlimited daily access to [music]
everything on Brilliant.